---
layout: post
title: "TIL: What is Jekyll Anyway?"
date: 2025-01-07 16:00:00 +0000
categories: example
tags: [jeykll, github pages]
---

[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) is a statis site generator written in `Ruby` by the great [Tom Preson-Wener](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Preston-Werner) (founder and former CEO of Github, aswell as prolific blogger/educator). It takes text content (in the form of `Markdown`, .md, files) and templates (`HTML` layouts) and converts them into a complete static website that can be served without a backend or database.

Once you have set up the boilerplate (still a slighty non-trivial matter for a noob like me, not not too difficult, especially for a bare-bones setup) all you have to do is add .md files to `_posts/` and any linked images/video/audio etc. to `assets/` and run the command `bundle exec jekyll serve`, and the static site html is automatically generated and hosted locally on your machine. You can then easily push this repo to Github and have it hosted on Github Pages for free!

_Some useful commands:_

- `bundle install` -> Installs the gems (libraries of code, similar to python libraries but managed using `Gemfile` via `Bundler`, the `Ruby` dependency management tool) specified in the `Gemfile`.
- `bundle update` -> Updates the gems in the `Gemfile` to the latest acceptable version.
- `bundle exec` -> Executes a command in the context of the bundle, i.e using all the gems and versions specified in `Gemfile.lock`.<br>

<p></p>

- `jekyll new <site-name>` -> Creates a new Jekyll site in the directory <site-name> with the required structure and example files.
- `jekyll build` -> Compiles the site and outputs static files to the `_site` directory.
- `jekyll serve` -> Builds the site and serves it locally via development server, typically available at `http://localhost:400`. It automatically rebuilds and regenerates the site when files are edited.
- `jekyll clean`-> Removes generated files such as the `_site` directory.

<p></p>

- `bundle exec jekyll serve` -> Builds and serves the static sit locally using the exact dependencies defined in `Gemfile`.

- `bundle exec jekyll serve --source <source_dir>` -> Builds and serves the site, with the source directory sotred in <source_dir> instead of the default `./` (current directory).
- `bundle exec jekyll serve --verbose` -> Increase the verbosity of information about the build and serve process, usefull for debugging.
- `bundle exec jekyll serve --port 5000` -> Serve the jekyll site locally to the specified port (in this case 5000) instead of the default port 4000.
- `bundle exec jekyll serve --drafts` -> Include posts in the _\_drafts/_ directory in the build/serve.
- `bundle exec jekyll serve --future` -> Include posts in the _\_posts/_ directory that have their frontmatter date set in the furute. E.g. a file with the name _2025-01-15-post.md_, if the current date is before the 15<sup>th</sup>.

_Port termination_

I had the problem where a jekyll site was running on the default port (4000), but I couldn't find it to terminate it. To do this I used `lsof -i :4000` (`python lsof` is the list _open files command_) which lists all the processes bound to port 4000. This prints the info for running processes on that port along with the process ID (`PID`), which can be killed using `kill <PID>`. `kill -9 <PID>` is _forceful_ kill of the PID, if `kill <PID>` doesn't work. You can also use `pkill -f <COMMAND>` to kill a command with a specific name, for example `pkill -f ruby` in the case of killing a Jekyll served website.
